Add the initial smoothness metric draft (#6629)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/smoothness/index.md

- Too much JS work on the main thread, leading to long tasks that block certain
  visual updates.

But how can you know when an animation frame has slipped its deadline and caused
a dropped frame?

You may be aware of one method:
[`requestAnimationFrame()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)
polling. `requestAnimationFrame()`, or "rAF", tells the browser that you wish to
perform an animation and asks for an opportunity to do so before the next paint
stage of the rendering pipeline. If your callback function isn't called at the
time you expect it, that means a paint wasn't executed, and one or more frames
were skipped. By polling and counting how often rAF is called, you can compute a
sort of "frames per second" (fps) metric.

```js
let frameTimes = [];
function pollFramesPerSecond(now) {
  frameTimes = [...frameTimes.filter(t => t > now - 1000), now];
  requestAnimationFrame(pollFramesPerSecond);
  console.log('Frames per second:', frameTimes.length);
}
requestAnimationFrame(pollFramesPerSecond);
```

{% Aside 'warning' %}
  The code above is an anti pattern and is strongly discouraged!
{% endAside %}

> Using `requestAnimationFrame()` polling is not a good idea for several reasons:

Reviewer: The following section I think could be moved inside the "Aside" above.  I think you don't need these details unless you want to learn why its discouraged.

Author: I think it's OK to leave it here. I do think we want to make it clear why this is a bad practice, but I'd be curious to hear from @mihajlija or @malchata if they disagree.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense in the flow of text to me, I'll suggest an edit to make it clear early on that it's an anti-pattern.

Reviewer 3: The "warning" aside feels like a better fit for this, but maybe it's too much text to fit in an aside.

video. Technically, this is perfectly smooth. But the video itself may have a
low bit rate, or even issues with network buffering. This isn't captured by
animation smoothness metrics directly, yet may still be quite jarring to the
user.

Or, a game which leverages `<canvas>` (perhaps even using techniques like
[offscreen
canvas](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/08/offscreen-canvas) to
ensure a steady frame rate) may technically be perfectly smooth in terms of
animation frames, all while failing to load high quality game assets into the
scene or exhibiting rendering artifacts.

And of course, a site can just have some really lame animations :)

<img
src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1c/Under-Construction-Bulldozer.gif"
alt="Old school under construction GIF" width="410" height="49">

I mean, I guess they were pretty cool for their time!

## States of a single animation frame

Because frames may be partially presented, or dropped frames may happen in ways
that do not affect smoothness, we have begun to think of each frame as having a
completeness or smoothness score.

Here are the ways in which we interpret the state of a single animation frame:

> {% Img src="image/eqprBhZUGfb8WYnumQ9ljAxRrA72/E0O8AhtBfv1XPdgTSNxX.svg",

Reviewer 2: Accessibility alert, text as an image without an appropriate alt. This should really just go into plain text.

Author: It was originally SVG because I wasn't sure if we could do the coloring, but I think we probably can. Let me see if that works better...

Author: I'm converting it to a table and will ping when done. Then let me know if it's still unclear.

Author: Updated! Let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: Way better! LGTM 👍

in DevTools via Rendering settings to see a live view of new animation frames,
which are color coded to differentiate partial updates from fully-dropped frame
updates. The reported fps is for fully-presented frames only.

{% Img src="image/eqprBhZUGfb8WYnumQ9ljAxRrA72/xazCKFNCWwjviBGS9JO6.png",
alt="Frame rendering stats", width="398", height="372" %}

### Frame Viewer in DevTools performance profile recordings

The [DevTools performance
panel](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/evaluate-performance/) has
long had a [Frames
viewer](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/evaluate-performance/reference/#frames).
However, it had grown a bit out of sync with how the modern rendering pipeline
actually works. There has been plenty of recent improvement, even in the latest
Chrome Canary, which we think will greatly ease debugging animation issues.

Today you will find that frames in the frames viewer are better aligned with
vsync boundaries, and color coded based on status. There is still not full
visualization for all the nuances outlined above, but we're planning to add more
in the near future.

> {% Img src="image/eqprBhZUGfb8WYnumQ9ljAxRrA72/xZTBWc5Ox2cKhSSaK9rS.png",

Reviewer: As discussed, I uploaded two alternative screenshots.  One for the scrolling test page above, another for Youtube.

{% Img src="image/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/ou89sgoFeg2481KVUWmF.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="148" %}
{% Img src="image/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/JHr1tEbP3eBmVHYY6JEl.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="148" %}

Author: Thanks, I'll use the first one as I think it better shows the "partially presented frame" concept.

---
title: Towards an animation smoothness metric

> subhead: Learn a bit about measuring animations, how to think about animation frames, and overall page smoothness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subhead: Learn about measuring animations, how to think about animation frames, and overall page smoothness.
```

> description: Learn a bit about measuring animations, how to think about animation frames, and overall page smoothness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn about measuring animations, how to think about animation frames, and overall page smoothness.
```

authors:
  - mmocny
date: 2021-11-03
hero: image/eqprBhZUGfb8WYnumQ9ljAxRrA72/Q32j8dRRdKSaxYaAYiNP.jpeg
alt: A silky smooth surface
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - performance
  - web-vitals
---

> We've all suffered from poor experiences where a page will "stutter" or "freeze"
> during scrolling or animations. We like to say that these experiences are not
> _smooth_. In an attempt to address these types of issues, the Chrome team has
> been working on adding more support to our lab tooling for animation detection,
> as well making steady improvements to the rendering pipeline diagnostics within
> Chromium.
> 
> We'd like to share some recent progress, offer some concrete tooling guidance,
> and discuss some ideas for future animation smoothness metrics. As always, we
> would love to hear your [feedback](#feedback).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You've probably experienced pages that "stutter" or "freeze"
during scrolling or animations. We like to say that these experiences are not
_smooth_. To address these types of issues, the Chrome team has
been working on adding more support to our lab tooling for animation detection,
as well making steady improvements to the rendering pipeline diagnostics within
Chromium.

We'd like to share some recent progress, offer concrete tooling guidance,
and discuss ideas for future animation smoothness metrics. As always, we
would love to hear your [feedback](#feedback).
```

This post will cover three main topics:

> 1. A quick look at animations and animation frames.
> 2. Our current thoughts on measuring overall animation smoothness.
> 3. A few practical suggestions for you to leverage in lab tooling today.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A quick look at animations and animation frames.
- Our current thoughts on measuring overall animation smoothness.
- A few practical suggestions for you to leverage in lab tooling today.
```

## What are animations?

Animations bring content to life! By making content move, especially in
response to user interactions, animations can make an experience feel more

> natural, understandable, and fun.

Reviewer: I have uploaded a video which showcases interacting with a Material UI Card.  Showcases simple animations.

* video/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/FHzUCPDkCfdcW7QLT18V.mov

> natural, understandable, and fun!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
natural, understandable, and fun.
```

> But poorly implemented animations, or just adding too many animations, can
> degrade the experience and make it decidedly not fun at all. We've probably all
> interacted with an interface which just added too many "helpful" transition
> effects, which actually become hostile to experience when they perform poorly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But poorly implemented animations, or just adding too many animations, can
degrade performance and the user experience. We've probably all
interacted with an interface with too many transitions
effects, which results in a hostile user experience that performs poorly.
```

Author: I think this changes the meaning slightly (and arguably we should remove the second sentence to avoid this confusion).

While it's true that unnecessary animations can be annoying, I don't think we need to comment on that in this post. It should primarily be about measuring animation smoothness.

> You can read plenty more about [Animations](/animations/), including how to
> [create performant animations](/animations-guide/) and how to [inspect
> animations using developer
> tooling](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css/animations/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% Aside %}
Learn more about [animations](/animations/), including how to
[create performant animations](/animations-guide/) and how to [inspect
animations using developer
tooling](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css/animations/).
{% endAside %}
```

### How do animations work?

> As a quick recap: the [Rendering Pipeline](/animations-overview/#pipeline)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a quick recap: the [rendering pipeline](/animations-overview/#pipeline)
```

consists of a few, **sequential** stages:

1. <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#6251A2">Style:</strong> Calculate the
   styles that apply to the elements.
2. <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#6251A2">Layout:</strong> Generate the
   geometry and position for each element.
3. <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#78A55A">Paint:</strong> Fill out the
   pixels for each element into layers.
4. <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#78A55A">Composite:</strong> Draw the
   layers to the screen.

> While there are many ways to define animations, they all fundamentally work via
> one of:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While there are many ways to define animations, they all fundamentally work via
one of the following:
```

> 1. Adjusting <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#6251A2">layout</strong>
>    properties
> 2. Adjusting <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#78A55A">paint</strong>
>    properties
> 3. Adjusting <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#78A55A">composite</strong>
>    properties

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Adjusting <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#6251A2">layout</strong>
   properties.
- Adjusting <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#78A55A">paint</strong>
   properties.
- Adjusting <strong style="font-weight:700;color:#78A55A">composite</strong>
   properties.
```

> Because these stages are sequential, it is important to define animations in
> terms of properties further down this pipeline. The earlier the update, the
> greater the costs and the less likely it is to be smooth. (See [rendering
> performance](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rendering)
> for more details.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because these stages are sequential, it is important to define animations in
terms of properties that are further down the pipeline. The earlier the update happens in the process,
the greater are the costs and it's less likely to be smooth. (See [Rendering
performance](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rendering)
for more details.)
```

> So, while it can sometimes be convenient to animate layout properties, there are
> costs to doing so—even if not immediately apparent. Animations should, wherever
> possible, be defined in terms of composite property changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While it can be convenient to animate layout properties, there are
costs to doing so, even if those costs aren't immediately apparent. Animations should be defined in terms of composite property changes wherever possible.
```

Defining [declarative CSS animations or using Web
Animations](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/design-and-ux/animations/css-vs-javascript),
and ensuring you [animate composite
properties](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/hardware-accelerated-animations/),

> is a great initial step to ensuring smooth and efficient animations. But still,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is a great first step to ensuring smooth and efficient animations. But still,
```

this alone does not guarantee smoothness because even efficient web animations

> have performance limits. That's why it is always important to measure!

Reviewer: I have uploaded a video which showcases a really good efficient animation which still stutters.

* video/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/t51Ii9ZYIDRhTPNPBtaU.mov

I don't think its super obvious from the video that the FPS is not perfect.  I am not sure if this is worth adding.

Reviewer 3: I think a great thing to link to would be Jake Archibald's Jank Invaders: https://jakearchibald.github.io/jank-invaders/

Reviewer: Its past time now but FYI: Jank Invaders is an example of main thread jank, which we already showcase.  This video showcases that even declarative Web Animations using composite properties can still jank.

## What are animation frames?

> Updates to the visual representation of a page take time to appear. Visual
> changes will eventually lead to a new animation frame, which is eventually
> presented to the user via their display.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Updates to the visual representation of a page take time to appear. A visual
change will lead to a new animation frame, which is eventually
rendered on the user's display.
```

> Generally, displays can only update at certain intervals, so visual updates are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Displays update on some interval, so visual updates are
```

> Generally, displays can only update at certain intervals, so visual updates are
> batched. Many displays update on a fixed interval of time, such as 60 times a
> second (i.e. 60hz). Some more modern displays can offer higher refresh rates
> (90-120hz are becoming common). Often these displays can actively adapt between
> refresh rates as needed, or even offer fully variable frame rates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, displays can only update at certain intervals, so visual updates are
batched. Many displays update on a fixed interval of time, such as 60 times a
second (that is 60&nbsp;Hz). Some more modern displays can offer higher refresh rates
(90-120&nbsp;Hz are becoming common). Often these displays can actively adapt between
refresh rates as needed, or even offer fully variable frame rates.
```

The goal for any application, like a game or a browser, is to process all these
batched visual updates and produce a visually complete animation frame within
the deadline, every time. Note that this goal is entirely distinct from other
important browser tasks such as loading content from the network quickly or
executing JavaScript tasks efficiently.

At some point, it can become too difficult to complete all visual updates within
the allotted deadline assigned by the display. When this happens, the browser
**drops a frame**. Your screen doesn't go black, it just repeats itself. You see
the same visual update for a bit longer—the same animation frame that was
presented at the previous frame opportunity.

> This actually happens often! It is not necessarily even perceptible, especially
> for static or document-like content, which is common on the web platform in
> particular. Dropped frames only become apparent when there are important visual
> updates, such as animations, for which we need a steady stream of animation
> updates to show smooth motion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can happen often, and isn't always perceptible, especially
for static or document-like content, which is common on the web platform.
Dropped frames only become apparent when there are important visual
updates, such as animations, for which we need a steady stream of updates to show smooth motion.
```

## What impacts animation frames?

> Web Developers can greatly impact the ability of a browser to quickly and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Web developers can greatly impact the ability of a browser to quickly and
```

efficiently render and present visual updates!

Some examples:

- Using content that is too large or resource intensive to decode quickly on the
  target device.
- [Using too many
  layers](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rendering/stick-to-compositor-only-properties-and-manage-layer-count)
  requiring too much GPU memory.

> - Defining overly-complex CSS styles or web animations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Defining overly complex CSS styles or web animations.
```

- Using design anti-patterns that disable fast rendering optimizations.

> - Too much JS work on the main thread, leading to long tasks that block certain
>   visual updates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Too much JS work on the main thread, leading to long tasks that block visual updates.
```

> But how can you know when an animation frame has slipped its deadline and caused
> a dropped frame?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But how can you know when an animation frame has missed its deadline and caused
a dropped frame?
```

Reviewer 3: Some of these edits may seem a bit finicky, but some are to improve readability for those who English isn't a first language. "Missed a deadline" is more in the common vernacular than "slipped a deadline".

> You may be aware of one method:
> [`requestAnimationFrame()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)
> polling. `requestAnimationFrame()`, or "rAF", tells the browser that you wish to
> perform an animation and asks for an opportunity to do so before the next paint
> stage of the rendering pipeline. If your callback function isn't called at the
> time you expect it, that means a paint wasn't executed, and one or more frames
> were skipped. By polling and counting how often rAF is called, you can compute a
> sort of "frames per second" (fps) metric.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One possible method is using
[`requestAnimationFrame()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)
polling, however it has several downsides. `requestAnimationFrame()`, or "rAF", tells the browser that you wish to
perform an animation and asks for an opportunity to do so before the next paint
stage of the rendering pipeline. If your callback function isn't called at the
time you expect it, that means a paint wasn't executed, and one or more frames
were skipped. By polling and counting how often rAF is called, you can compute a
sort of "frames per second" (FPS) metric.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% Aside 'warning' %}
 The following code is an anti-pattern and is strongly discouraged!
{% endAside %}
```

Reviewer 2: Moving the warning before the code sample

```js
let frameTimes = [];
function pollFramesPerSecond(now) {

>   frameTimes = [...frameTimes.filter(t => t > now - 1000), now];

Reviewer 3: This line reads okay, but it better to move the filter call and store its result in a variable so that the code reads a little more sequentially. I had to scan it a couple times before I realized what was going on.

  requestAnimationFrame(pollFramesPerSecond);
  console.log('Frames per second:', frameTimes.length);
}
requestAnimationFrame(pollFramesPerSecond);
```

> {% Aside 'warning' %}
>   The code above is an anti pattern and is strongly discouraged!
> {% endAside %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Using `requestAnimationFrame()` polling is not a good idea for several reasons:

> - Every interested party (or script) has to set up its own polling loop.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Every script has to set up its own polling loop.
```

Reviewer 3: Again, this may seem finicky, but can this be simplified to just "script"? It's OK if not, because you may be referring to something else besides scripts, but if you are, maybe spell it out.

- It can block the critical path.

> - Even if the rAF polling function is _fast_, when used continuously it can
>   prevent `requestIdleCallback()` from being able to schedule long idle blocks
>   (blocks that exceed a single frame).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Even if the rAF polling is fast, it can
  prevent `requestIdleCallback()` from being able to schedule long idle blocks when used continuously
  (blocks that exceed a single frame).
```

> - Every interested party/script has to set up its own polling loop.
> - It can block the critical path.
> - Even if the rAF polling function is "fast", when used continuously it can
>   prevent `requestIdleCallback()` from being able to schedule long idle blocks
>   (i.e. blocks that exceed a single frame).
> - Similarly, lack of long idle-blocks prevents the browser from scheduling other
>   long running tasks (e.g. longer GC's and other background or speculative
>   work).
> - If polling is toggled on/off, then you'll miss cases where frame budget has
>   been exceeded.
> - Polling will report false-positives in cases where the browser is using
>   variable update frequency (e.g. due to power, visibility status, etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Every interested party (or script) has to set up its own polling loop.
- It can block the critical path.
- Even if the rAF polling function is _fast_, when used continuously it can
  prevent `requestIdleCallback()` from being able to schedule long idle blocks
  (blocks that exceed a single frame).
- Similarly, lack of long idle-blocks prevents the browser from scheduling other
  long running tasks (such as longer garbage collection and other background or speculative
  work).
- If polling is toggled on and off, then you'll miss cases where frame budget has
  been exceeded.
- Polling will report false-positives in cases where the browser is using
  variable update frequency (for example, due to power or visibility status).
```

- And most importantly, it doesn't actually capture all types of animation
  updates!

> You can see how too much work on the main thread can impact the ability to see
> animation frames. You can play with the [Jank
> Sample](https://googlechrome.github.io/devtools-samples/jank/) to see how a rAF
> driven animation, once there is too much work on the main thread work (i.e.
> layout) will lead to dropped frames and fewer rAF callbacks, and lower fps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Too much work on the main thread can impact the ability to see
animation frames. Check out the [Jank
Sample](https://googlechrome.github.io/devtools-samples/jank/) to see how a rAF
driven animation, once there is too much work on the main thread (such as
layout), will lead to dropped frames and fewer rAF callbacks, and lower FPS.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd add instructions here to open the Rendering performance monitor in DevTools. Or a link to instructions.

When the main thread becomes bogged down, visual updates begin to stutter.
**Jank!**

Many measurement tools have focused extensively on the ability for the main
thread to yield in a timely manner, and for animation frames to run smoothly.
But this is not the whole story! Consider the following example:

> **TODO(mmocny): add video link.**

Reviewer: I have uploaded 2 videos:
* video/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/kF4oAynqVcROFo5DXWTO.mov
* video/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/xkdE00Gizsks9ytPkP6r.mov

Both showcase threaded scrolling, while displaying the rAF polling reported FPS in the top corner.  One of the examples injects long-tasks in order to decrease main thread, rAF, FPS.  I think side-by-side comparison may be best -- but we could just use the slow example.

Reviewer: From https://web.dev/handbook/markup-media/ I suggest perhaps using the following:

{% Video src="video/nM10iAStORWg0YlDbPc2czmpRRr2/xkdE00Gizsks9ytPkP6r.mov", autoplay: true, loop: true, playsinline: true %}

This video shows a page that periodically injects long tasks onto the main

> thread. These long tasks completely ruin the ability for the page to provide

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
thread. These long tasks completely ruin the ability of the page to provide
```

certain types of visual updates, and you can see a corresponding drop of

> `requestAnimationFrame()` reported fps to 0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`requestAnimationFrame()` reported FPS to 0.
```

And yet, the page continues to scroll smoothly. This is because on modern
browsers, [scrolling is often
threaded](https://blogs.windows.com/msedgedev/2017/03/08/scrolling-on-the-web/#:~:text=The%20multithreaded%20web),
driven entirely by the compositor.

> This is an example that simultaneously contains many dropped frames on the main
> thread, yet still has many successfully-delivered frames of scrolling on the
> compositor thread. What's more, the main thread paint update, once the long task
> is complete, actually has no visual change to offer anyway. rAF polling
> suggested a frame drop to 0, but _visually_, a user wouldn't be able to notice a
> difference!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example that simultaneously contains many dropped frames on the main
thread, yet still has many successfully-delivered frames of scrolling on the
compositor thread. Once the long task
is complete, the main thread paint update has no visual change to offer anyway. rAF polling
suggested a frame drop to 0, but _visually_, a user wouldn't be able to notice a
difference!
```

> As you can see, for animation frames, the story is just not that simple.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For animation frames, the story is not that simple.
```

> As you can see, for animation frames, the story is just not that simple.

Reviewer: Hey now, I had used the phrase "simply not that simple" and I was proud of that joke.

{% Aside %}

>   Note: there are many reasons why long tasks are bad—and these are captured
>   with [dedicated performance APIs](/custom-metrics/), such as the Long Tasks
>   API or the Event Timing API. Yet, there are also features, such as
>   [`isInputPending()`](/isinputpending/), where long tasks during idle periods
>   may be added entirely by design and be a good thing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many reasons why long tasks are bad—and these are captured
  with [dedicated performance APIs](/custom-metrics/), such as the Long Tasks
  API or the Event Timing API. Yet, there are also features, such as
  [`isInputPending()`](/isinputpending/), where long tasks during idle periods
  may be added entirely by design and be a good thing.
```

{% endAside %}

> ## Animation frames: _updates that matter_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Animation frames: Updates that matter
```

> Hopefully the above example showcases that there is more to the story than just
> `requestAnimationFrame()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above example showcases that there is more to the story than just
`requestAnimationFrame()`.
```

> So when do animation updates, and animation frames, actually matter?  Here are
> some criteria that we think about, and we'd love to get feedback on:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So when do animation updates and animation frames matter?  Here are
some criteria we're thinking about and would love to get feedback on:
```

> 1. Main and Compositor thread updates
> 2. Missing paint updates
> 3. Detecting animations
> 4. Quality vs quantity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Main and compositor thread updates
- Missing paint updates
- Detecting animations
- Quality versus quantity
```

> ### Main and Compositor thread updates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Main and compositor thread updates
```

> First of all, animation frame updates are not boolean. It is not the case that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Animation frame updates are not boolean. It is not the case that
```

frames may only be fully dropped or fully presented. There are many reasons why
an animation frame may be _partially_ _presented_. In other words, it can
simultaneously have _some stale content_ while also having _some new visual
updates_ which are presented.

The most common example of this is when the browser is unable to produce a new main
thread update within frame deadline but does have a new compositor thread update

> (e.g. the threaded scrolling example from earlier).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(such as the threaded scrolling example from earlier).
```

> One important reason why using declarative animations to animate composite
> properties is so recommended, is precisely because that enables an animation to
> be driven entirely by the compositor thread even when the main thread is blocked
> processing tasks! These types of animations can continue to produce visual
> updates efficiently and in parallel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One important reason why using declarative animations to animate composite
properties is recommended is that doing so enables an animation to
be driven entirely by the compositor thread even when the main thread is busy.
These types of animations can continue to produce visual
updates efficiently and in parallel.
```

On the other hand, there may be cases where a main thread update finally becomes
available for presentation, but only after missing several frame deadlines. Here
the browser will have _some_ new update, but it may not be _the very latest_.

Broadly speaking, we consider frames that contain some new visual updates,
without all new visual updates, as a _partial frame_. Partial frames are fairly
common. Ideally, partial updates would at least include the most important
visual updates, like animations, but that can only happen if animations are driven by the compositor thread.

### Missing paint updates

> Another type of partial update is when media like images are simply not done
> painting (decoding and rasterizing) in time for frame presentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another type of partial update is when media like images have not finished
decoding and rasterizing in time for frame presentation.
```

> painting (e.g. decoding and rasterizing) in time for frame presentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
painting (decoding and rasterizing) in time for frame presentation.
```

Or, even if a page is perfectly static, browsers may still fall behind rendering
visual updates during rapid scrolling. That is because the pixel renditions of
content beyond the visible viewport may be discarded to save GPU memory. It
takes time to render pixels, and it may take longer than a single frame to
render everything after a large scroll, like a finger fling. This is commonly
known as _checkerboarding_.

With each frame rendering opportunity, it's possible to track how much of the
latest visual updates actually got to the screen. This is broadly known as

> _frame throughput_.

Reviewer: I think this line needs updating to something like: 

"With each frame rendering opportunity, it's possible to track how much of the
latest visual updates actually got to the screen.  Measuring the ability to do so over many frames (or time) is broadly known as _frame throughput_."

...in other words, throughput isn't something you do for a single frame, its for a span of time.  The existing text may not make that clear.

Author: Updated.

throttle the rate at which it attempts visual updates and thus decreases
effective frame rates. While technically that can reduce the number of dropped
frame updates, visually it will still appear as a lower frame throughput.

Yet, not all types of low frame throughput are bad. If the page is mostly idle
and there are no active animations, a low frame rate is just as visually
appealing as a high frame rate (and, it can save battery!).

So when does frame throughput matter?

### Detecting animations

High frame throughput matters especially during periods with important
animations. Different animation types will depend on visual updates from a
specific thread (main, compositor, or a worker), so its visual update is
dependent on that thread providing its update within the deadline. We say that a
given thread _affects smoothness_ whenever there is an active animation that
depends on that thread update.

Some types of animations are easier to define and detect than others.
Declarative animations, or user-input-driven animations, are clearer to define
than JavaScript-driven animations implemented as periodic updates to animatable
style properties.

> Even with `requestAnimationFrame()`, which is designed for animations, you

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even with `requestAnimationFrame()` you
```

Reviewer 3: It may seem nit-picky, but RAF benefits were touted earlier.

cannot always assume that every rAF call is necessarily producing a visual
update or animation. For example, using rAF polling just to track frame rate
(as shown above) should not itself affect smoothness measurements since there is
no visual update.

{% Aside %}

>   **Note:** animation detection in tooling, as well as the specifics of
>   animation implementations in browsers, continually evolves and improves.
>   Chrome recently moved [background-color
>   animations](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/hardware-accelerated-animations/#whats-coming-next)
>   from main thread to compositor!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Animation detection in tooling, as well as the specifics of
  animation implementations in browsers, continually evolves and improves.
  Chrome recently moved [background-color
  animations](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/hardware-accelerated-animations/#whats-coming-next)
  from the main thread to the compositor!
```

{% endAside %}

> ### Quality vs. quantity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Quality versus quantity
```

Finally, detecting animations and animation frame updates is still only part of
the story because it only captures the quantity of animation updates, not the
quality.

> For example, you may see a perfectly steady stream of 60fps while watching a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you may see a perfectly steady stream of 60&nbsp;fps while watching a
```

> For example, you may see a perfectly steady stream of 60&nbsp;fps while watching a
> video. Technically, this is perfectly smooth. But the video itself may have a
> low bit rate, or even issues with network buffering. This isn't captured by
> animation smoothness metrics directly, yet may still be quite jarring to the
> user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, you may see a steady framerate of of 60&nbsp;fps while watching a
video. Technically, this is perfectly smooth, but the video itself may have a
low bit rate, or issues with network buffering. This isn't captured by
animation smoothness metrics directly, yet may still be jarring to the
user.
```

Or, a game which leverages `<canvas>` (perhaps even using techniques like
[offscreen
canvas](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/08/offscreen-canvas) to
ensure a steady frame rate) may technically be perfectly smooth in terms of
animation frames, all while failing to load high quality game assets into the
scene or exhibiting rendering artifacts.

> And of course, a site can just have some really lame animations :)

Reviewer 3: Do plaintext emoticons get translated to emoji automatically? If not, let's just inline the standard smiley emoji in lieu of plaintext 🙂

Author: SGTM

        Partially presented</strong>
      </td>
      <td>Compositor only but the compositor update does not have an
      animation that affects smoothness</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong style="background:#EECDCD;padding:0.25em;">
        Dropped frame</strong>
      </td>
      <td>No update. There was no compositor update desired, and main was
      delayed</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong style="background:#DE9D9B;padding:0.25em;">
        Dropped frame</strong>
      </td>
      <td>A compositor update was desired, but it was delayed</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><strong style="background:#DE9D9B;padding:0.25em;">
        Stale frame</strong>
      </td>
      <td>An update was desired, it was produced by the renderer, but the
      GPU still did not present it before the vsync deadline</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

It's possible to turn these states into somewhat of a score. And perhaps one way
to interpret this score is to consider it a _probability_ of being observable by
the user. A single dropped frame may not be very observable, but a sequence of
many dropped frames affecting smoothness in a row sure is!

> ## Putting it all together: a Percent Dropped Frames metric

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Putting it all together: A Percent Dropped Frames metric
```

While it can sometimes be necessary to dive deep into the state of each
animation frame, it's also useful to just assign a quick "at a glance" score for
an experience.

Because frames may be _partially presented,_ and because even fully skipped
frame updates may not actually _affect smoothness_, we want to focus less on
just counting frames, and more on the _extent_ to which the browser is unable to
provide _visually complete_ updates _when it mattered_.

The mental model should move from:

1. *Frames Per Second*, to
2. Detecting missing and important animation updates, to
3. *Percentage Dropped* over a given time period.

> Put another way, what matters is: the proportion of time waiting for important
> updates. We think this matches the natural way users experience the smoothness

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What matters is: _the proportion of time waiting for important
updates_. We think this matches the natural way users experience the smoothness
```

of web content in practice. So far, we have been using the following as an
initial set of metrics:

- **Average Percent Dropped:** for all non-idle animation frames throughout the
  whole timeline
- **Worst Case of Percent Dropped Frames:** as measured over 1 second sliding
  windows of time.
- **95th percentile of Percent Dropped Frames:** as measured over 1 second

>   sliding windows of time.

Reviewer 2: Not a necessary change, but I think this would stand out more as a table with Metric/Definition columns.
